---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---


# Intro to NLP- representing text data


```{code-cell} ipython3
from sklearn.feature_extraction import text
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import euclidean_distances
from sklearn import datasets
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.naive_bayes import MultinomialNB
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

ng_X,ng_y = datasets.fetch_20newsgroups(categories =['comp.graphics','sci.crypt'],
                                       return_X_y = True)
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import CountVectorizer
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import euclidean_distances
import pandas as pd
```

All of the machine leanring models we have seen only use numerical features organized into a table with one row per samplea and one column per feature.

That's actually generally true.  ALl ML models require numerical features, at some point. The process of taking data that is not numerical and tabular, which is called unstrucutred, into strucutred (tabular) format we require is called feature extraction.  There are many, many ways to do that.  We'll see a few over the course of the rest of the semester.  Some more advanced models hide the feature extraction, by putting it in the same function, but it's always there.



## Terms


- document: unit of text we’re analyzing (one sample)
- token: sequence of characters in some particular document that are grouped together as a useful semantic unit for processing (basically a word)
- stop words: no meaning, we don’t need them (like a, the, an,). Note that this is context dependent
- dictionary: all of the possible words that a given system knows how to process



## Bag of Words Representionat

We're going to learn a represetnation called the bag of words.  It ignores the order of the words within a document. To do this, we'll first extract all of the tokens (tokenize) the docuemtns and then count how mnay times each word appears.  This will be our numerical representation of the data.  

````{margin}
```{admonition} Further Reading
[Transformers](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/data_transforms.html) are another broad class of sklearn objects.  We've seen Estimators mostly so far.
We're focusing on the [text feature extraction](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature_extraction.html#text-feature-extraction) for now.
```
````
Then we initialize our transformer, and use the fit transform method to fit the vectorizer model and apply it to this sentence.

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence= 'I walked a dog. I had fun'
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts =  CountVectorizer()
```

then we fit transform it:

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.fit_transform([sentence])
```

We see it returns a sparse matrix.  A sparse matrix means that it has a lot of 0s in it and so we only represent the data.  

For example
```{code-cell} ipython3
mfull = np.asarray([[1,0,0,0,0],[0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0]])
```

but as a sparse matrix, we could store fewer values.
```{code-cell} ipython3
[[0,0,1],[1,2,1],[2,3,1]]# the above
```

So any matrix where the number of total values is low enough, we can store it more efficiently by tracking the locations and values instead of all of the zeros.

To actually see it though we have to cast out of that into a regular array.


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.fit_transform([sentence]).toarray()
```


For only one sentence it's all ones, because it only has a small vocabulary.

We can make it more interesting, by picking a second sentence
```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.vocabulary_
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_list = [sentence, 'This is a sentence', 'I have a dog']
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
mat = counts.fit_transform(sentence_list).toarray()
mat
```


We can also examine attributes of the object.
````{margin}
```{tip}
Notice that we keep using the same tools over and over to explore how things work.  You can do this on your own, when you're learning new things. Example
code is readily available online but not all of it is well documented or
clearly explained.

Also, in a job, much, much, more of your time will be spent reading code than writing code from scratch. These strategies will help you get familiar with a new code base and get up to speed faster.
```
````

```{code-cell} ipython3
total_occurences_per_word = mat.sum(axis=0)
total_words_per_document = mat.sum(axis=1)
total_occurences_per_word, total_words_per_document
```

We can also get the names out as an array instead of as a dictionary:

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```

and this makes it easier to put the counts in a DataFrame to see what it looks like better:

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df = pd.DataFrame(data=mat, columns =counts.get_feature_names_out())
sentence_df
```


From this we can see that the representation is the count of how many times each word appears.

Now we can apply it to all of the sentences, or our whole {term}`corpus`. We can get the dictionary out in order using the `get_feature_names` method. This method has a generic name, not specific to text, because it's a property of transformers in general.

```{code-cell} ipython3

```
