---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Iterables and Pandas Data Frames
## House Keeping

## Assignment 1

You can revise it to fix anything you learned today before I give feedback. 

## Closing Jupyter server.

In the terminal use Ctrl+C (actually control, not command on mac).

It will ask you a question and give options, read and follow 


**or**

do ctrl+C a second time. 

A jupyter server typically runs at `localhost:8888`, but if you have multiple servers running the count increases. 


Once I saw a student in office hours working on `localhost:8894` asking why their code kept crashing.

```{important}
Remember to close your jupyter server
```

## Using Pandas


We will use data with a library called [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/).  By convention, we import it like:
```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
```

- the `import` keyword is used for loading packages
- `pandas` is the name of the package that is installed
- `as` keyword allows us to assign an alias (nickname)
- `pd` is the typical alias for pandas
  



##  Everything is Data



Data we will see: 

- tabular data
- websites as data
- activity logs on websites
- images
- text 


## Why inspection in code?

Some IDEs give you GUI based tools to inspect objects.  We are going to do it programmatically inline with our analyses for two reasons.

- (minor, logistical) it helps make for good notes
- (most importantly) it helps build habits of data science

In data science, our code will be aiming to tell a story.


+++

If you're curious about something, try it out, see what happens.  We're going to use a lot of code inspection tools during class.  These are helpful both for understanding what's going on, but the advantage to knowing how to get this information programmatically even though a different IDE would give you inspection tools  is that it helps you treat your code as data.

## everything is an object

let's examine the `type` of some variables:
```{code-cell} ipython3
a=4
b = 'monday'
c =5.3
d = print
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(a)
```
`
ints are a base python type, like they appear in other languages


strings are iterable type, meaning that theycan be indexed into, or their elements iterated over.  For a more technical definition, see the [official python glossary entry](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-iterable)
```{code-cell} ipython3
type(b)
```

````{margin}
```{important}
This bit I did not do in class, we will go over it again, but for completeness it is here too
```
````

we can select one element
```{code-cell} ipython3
b[0]
```

or multiple, this is called slicing. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
b[0:3]
```


negative numbers count from the right. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
b[-1]
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
type (c)
```

a variable can hold a whole function. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
type(d)
```

functions are also objects like any other type in python

we can use the variable just like the function itself
```{code-cell} ipython3
d('hello')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
print(b)
```


## Tabular Data 

Structured data is easier to work with than other data.

We're going to focus on tabular data for now. At the end of the course, we'll examine images, which are structured, but more complex and text, which is much less structured.

+++
## Getting familiar with the datset

We're going to use a dataset about [coffee quality](https://github.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/) today.



How was this dataset collected?
- reviews added to DB
- then scraped

Where did it come from?
- coffee Quality Institute's trained reviewers.

what format is it provided in?
- csv (Comma Separated Values)

what other information is in this repository?
- the code to scrape and clean the data
- the data before cleaning


It's important to always know where data came from and how it was collected.

This helps you know what is is useful for and what its limitations are.

```{admonition} Further Reading
An important research article on documenting datasets for machine learning is called [Datasheets for Datasets](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/datasheets-for-datasets/) these researchers also did a [follow up study](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/understanding-machine-learning-practitioners-data-documentation-perceptions-needs-challenges-and-desiderata/) to better understand how practitioner use datasheets and decide how to use data.

If topics like this are interesting to you, let me know! my research is related to this and I have a lot of students who complete 310 do research in my lab. 
```


## Loading the Coffee Data
Get raw url for the dataset click on the raw button on the [csv page](https://github.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/blob/master/data/robusta_ratings_raw.csv), then copy the url.
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_data_url = 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database/master/data/robusta_data_cleaned.csv'
```

```{warning}
This did not work in class, so I downloaded the data and dragged it to the same folder as my notebook
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)
```

If the file is local, you can load it this way.  The parameter of the function is the **path** to the dataset, that can be relative, like below, absolute (a full address on your computer) or a URL like above. 

```Python
pd.read_csv('robusta_data_cleaned.csv')
```


This read in the data and printed it out because it is the last line on the cell.
If we do something else after, it will read it in, but not print it out.

In order to use it, we save the output to a variable.
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df = pd.read_csv(coffee_data_url)
```

we choose this name so that related variables will all use `coffee` and then have other parts after `_` to describe them in terms of type and content. In Python, for variables, the typical convention is to use `_` to join words, not CamelCase, which is used for classes, like `DataFrame`

we can look at it again using the jupyter display
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df
```


Next we examine the type

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(coffee_df)
```

This is a new type provided by the `pandas` library, called a [dataframe](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/dsintro.html#dataframe)

We can also exmaine its parts.  It consists of several; first the column headings

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.columns
```

These are a special type called [Index](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.Index.html) that is also provided by pandas. 

It also tells us that the actual headings are of `dtype` `object`. `object` is used for strings or columns with [mixed types](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.dtypes.html)

the [`dtype`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/basics.html#dtypes) is slightly different from base Python types and is how pandas classifies but roughly is the same idea as a type. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(coffee_df.columns)
```

We can look at the first 5 rows with `head`

```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_df.head()
```

Some notes:
- `columns` is an attribute, something that the `DataFrame` object stores directly so we access it as is
- `head` is a method, it *does* something to the content and can rely on parameters (here `n=5` can be changed to show different numbers of rows)


If we forget the `()` on a method, it looks weird in the output
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: ["scroll-output"]
coffee_df.head
```

We can see more about why this happens with `type`. 


```{code-cell} ipython3
type(coffee_df.head)
```
Without the parenthesis, it is the literal function object. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
type(coffee_df.head())
```
With the parenthesis, it runs the function and `type` examines what it returns, the `DataFrame` object. 

## Assignment 1 tips 

### Pythonic Loops

In Python, we call good style 'pythonic', for loops that means making a sensible loop variable. 
Let's firs tmake a list object we can iterate over
```{code-cell} ipython3
coffee_cols_list = list(coffee_df.columns)
coffee_cols_list
```

Now we will write a loop to clean up the `.`

```{code-cell} ipython3
clean_cols = []
for col in coffee_cols_list:
    clean_cols.append(col.replace('.','_'))

clean_cols
```

This is equivalent, but easier to read than: 
```{code-cell} ipython3
clean_cols = []
for i in range(len(coffee_cols_list)):
    clean_cols.append(coffee_cols_list[i].replace('.','_'))

clean_cols
```
In this version the loop variable `i`  is a number we have to use to access what we want, where in the first one the `col` loop variable is the thing we want. Simpler and easier to read, which is better by definition in Python. 


To make it better than in class, without a lot of extra logic we can do the `...` first then the single ones: 
```{code-cell} ipython3
clean_cols = []
for col in coffee_cols_list:
    clean_cols.append(col.replace('...','_').replace('.','_'))

clean_cols
```

This shows that we can chain string operations (this will coem in handy at other times).

The above is a good form for all `for` loops in Python, but since it was specifically making a list with append, we could make it more concise with a [list comprehension](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#list-comprehensions). 

```{code-cell} ipython3
clean_cols_alt = [clean_cols.append(col.replace('...','_').replace('.','_')) for col in coffee_cols_list]
```

these two ways are the same
```{code-cell} ipython3
clean_cols_alt == clean_cols
```

## Conditionals Evaluate in order
recall we set this variable

```{code-cell} ipython3
a
```

If we write conditions where they can be both true, but we want the larger one to act, if we put them in this order it never sees the second, because the first is true. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
if a >1:
    print('greater 1')
elif a >2:
    print('greater 2')
```

This one works. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
if a >2:
    print('greater 2')
elif a >1:
    print('greater 1')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

```
## Questions After Class


### What is the name of the inline iteration/loop again in Python?
list comprehension

### I just want to know more about github In general as to me, although it's new so it will take some time to get used to, it's still pretty confusing to me

I will hold an optional session for a bit more GitHub.  You can also take CSC311 for a lot more detail



### when will we learn about the portfolio?
After A2 feedback, which will be the first time it makes sense for you to work on it. 

### How would you attain a level 3 on any given skill?

There are [example ideas](https://rhodyprog4ds.github.io/BrownFall24/portfolio/extensions.html) in the Portfolio section of the website, but it will make more sense after Assignment 2 and then I'll spend more time on it in class again. 



### Im confused on what this "pandas.core.frame.DataFrame" is

It is the main data type provided by pandas, that represents a table of data. We will keep working with and inspecting them. For a technical description see the [api docs](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/frame.html), for a high level description, see the [getting started tutorial](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/intro_tutorials/01_table_oriented.html)

### would like to get feedback on my homework so I can fix any errors I have

You will get feedback and have a chance to revise later. 

### Can you use any dataset from github using the raw URL and importing it? Can you use any dataset URL or only github?

You can use any URL that has a compatible type of data. 



### if level 1 is determined by attendence and participation, how can I assure I am getting my lesson 1s fulfilled every class

I am removing the prismia grading this semester, but it seems I missed one reference of that in the syllabus. 

### If we get an achievement are we gonna see those on github or do we have to keep track of all the achievements we have to see our grade?

in your feedback you will get a table with your current standing each time work is assessed

### Can you slow down a little, some times it gets hard to follow along
I will try a little, but also please either message on prismia or raise your hand if you ever fall behind. 